[Music] Hello everyone. I'm Norman Wildberger.
This is our second video on Euler product and
zeta functions. We are looking at this
from a box arithmetic point of view. So,
we've identified something that we might
call the fundamental identity of arithmetic,
which is largely equivalent to the more
usual fundamental theorem of arithmetic,
and we express it here in terms of this series
of boxes which are being carried together to form
this beautiful M set or box with just the natural
numbers starting from one in it. So here we have
powers of the prime two, here we have powers
of the prime three, powers of the prime five,
of the prime seven, and so on. So we form
the carrot over all primes in this fashion,
and I remind you that to form the carrot of two
boxes we take the box consisting of all possible
products of elements, one from here and one from
here. Now, because these are unbounded objects,
we require a different kind of theory, so we
need to go beyond what we've already set up.
I'm not going to do that today, so we are just
going to think about this sort of informally.
But generally, our orientation is that we're
going to try ultimately to assign meaning to
something like this in a finite way. We want
to always avoid the assumption that we can do
an infinite number of things because we can't. So
we have to try to state what we're talking about
here, and we have to bring out the meaning of such
an equation in a purely finite way. Okay, so today
what we're going to do is we're going to take this
fundamental identity and we're going to augment it
in certain ways, moving towards the Euler product
for the zeta function. But the zeta function is,
from my point of view, not really a proper
mathematical object, and neither is the Euler
product. Nevertheless, we're going to be moving
in that direction, and we'll see that we are
touching base with a wide variety of interesting
things. In fact, we'll be able to, even from
just this elementary point of view, any prior
understanding of the zeta function or any of the
associated number theory, we're going to be able
to see how the zeta function story somehow has a
connection with prime numbers and the general
growth of prime numbers. So we'll be able to
access some of that in a very elementary way here.
Okay, so just make sure that we understand how to
form the carrot of two boxes. Here's a box with
elements a, b, another one with elements c, d. The
carrot of these two boxes is the box consisting
of the elements a * c, a * d, a * e, b * c, b * d,
and b * e. So now in the world of boxes, you can
always square any box just by multiplying the box
by itself, and this property pleasantly follows
from the associative law that the square of a * b
is equal to the square of a * the square of b.
So when we're talking about squares of elements,
there's, in the box world, various levels at which
we can kind of apply an operation like that. So
instead of just squaring a box, we could also do
something sort of one level down, by which I mean
square the elements of a box. Alright, so given
the box a, we could look at the box consisting
of the squares a² as little a runs through the
box capital A. So for example, here's a box with
two elements, the number three and alpha. If we
apply this F to it, we square three to get nine,
we square alpha to get alpha squared. So that's
what F does to this box. It's not really squaring
the box itself, it's squaring the elements in the
box, and then we get an interesting connection
with the carrot operation because F of a carrot b
is F of a carrot F of b. So for example, here if
we take this identity here and we consider forming
this F to all the ingredients, so F of this thing
would just be the box a² b². F of this is the box
c² d² e². So if we carrot those, we have to form
all possible products a² * c², a² * d², etc., but
a² * c² by this rule here is the same as (a * c)².
So what we see is that as we run through all
six possible combinations, what we're getting
are just the squares of all the elements over here
in the carrot of these two original boxes. Okay,
so if this is box a and this is box b, this is
box a carrot b, then F of a carrot b is this,
and F of a is here and F of b is here, and we
see the identity is valid. So now let's take the
fundamental identity of arithmetic and let's apply
this F operation to both sides. So with this M set
consisting of the powers of two, we're going to
square all of those elements. So there's 1², 2²,
2²², 2³², etc. Similarly, we're going to square
all the elements in the M set consisting of powers
of three, and of powers of five, and of powers of
seven, etc., and according to the identity that
we've just established, on the right-hand side
what we should be getting is the M set consisting
of the squares of the natural numbers. And I hope
you see this is not surprising at all. I mean if
you take some element here, for example, 4², and
ask, well, how can you get 4² by taking products
of things like this? Well, you could do it here.
You could take 2² * 1², and that's the only way
you can get 4², just in the same way that the
only way of getting 4 is to take 2² * 1. Okay,
so now let's just rewrite this a little bit. So
instead of having the squares of all of these
things, let's put the squares right above the two.
So, for example, this next one over here would
be 2³². Let's rewrite that as 2²³. Then what we
have here is an M set consisting of powers of 2²,
and over here we'll have an M set consisting of
powers of 3², and so on. On the right-hand side,
we still have the same thing over here, and
now we can try to sort of connect with the
sums that are appearing in the zeta function and
in the Euler product formula by applying what we
call the summation or the sum operator,
capital S. I remind you what that does:
it takes an M set and just takes the sum of
all the elements of that M set. And we saw
that S of a carrot b equals S of a times S
of b. So this summation operation works well
on carrots of things. So let's apply S to both
sides of this thing that we've just obtained,
this thing here. So S of this one here is
just the sum of all the elements. That's the
series in quotes: 1 + 2² + 2²² + 2²³, etc. And S
of this thing is the sum of all the powers of 3²,
so it's 1 + 3² + 3²², etc., and then a similar
one for five and seven, etc., and we're going to
multiply all of these sums. That's what's
being described here. Now this sum here
is like a geometric series. Okay, it starts with
one and then the common ratio is just 2². At each
stage, we're just multiplying by 2². So if we
liberally apply the standard formula for the
sum of an unbounded geometric series, it's 1 over
1 minus this common ratio 2². Okay, so this is all
in we're just trying to get an idea, get our heads
around this and see if anything comes up that
might be interesting and worthwhile. So at least
formally, this geometric series is represented
in some fashion or another by this term here.
Similarly, there's another geometric series with
first term one and constant ratio 3², so its sum
in some sense is 1/1 - 3². The next one will be
1/1 - 5², etc., and on the right-hand side is the
sum of these guys, just the sum of the squares:
1 + 2² + 3² + 4², etc. So a literal application
of this rule in this context seems to give us
something which doesn't have any immediate sense,
okay, although it's possible that perhaps there's
some interpretation of these unbounded objects
for which some kind of equality like this has
some kind of meaning. But certainly, currently,
this doesn't look like it's very promising. I
mean these things here are, you know, one, these
are negative numbers, and they're getting bigger
in the denominators. This whole thing is getting
smaller and, you know, and this one is obviously
getting bigger, at least if we sort of proceed
in terms of partial sums. So the validity and
the meaning in fact of something like this is very
much in question, but nevertheless, this is in the
spirit in the direction of the Euler product
for the zeta function. So let's keep going a
little bit further with it. What made that work
is that the squaring operation has the property
that mn² = m² * n². But that property, that sort
of multiplicative property, is shared by lots of
other things. For example, cubing. It's also true
that if you cube m * n, you get m³ * n³. So in
fact the same reasoning allows us to replace all
the numbers in the fundamental identity with their
cubes. So here are powers of two and we're cubing
all of them. Here are powers of three and we're
cubing all of them, etc., and we're always going
over all primes. So the first one is twos and
threes, then fives and sevens, then elevens, etc.,
and on the right-hand side we just get the M set
consisting of the cubes of the natural numbers.
And again the meaning is the same as before. If
we take any one element in here, okay, then it's
obtainable in exactly one way as a product of
something in this first box times something in the
next box times something in the next box, etc.,
etc., where most of those product constituents
are ones and only a finite number of them are not.
Okay, so again we can perform the same little
twist where we interchange the powers here,
so instead of having 2²³, we could write 2³².
Then we see that the entries of this thing here
are just given by this geometric sequence.
Each term is 2³ times the previous one,
and similarly here, a geometric sequence: each
one is 3³ times the previous one. And then when we
apply our S operator, well, again we have a
geometric series: first term one, constant
ratio the prime cubed. So in general it would be
1 over 1 minus P³, and we're taking the product P
over all primes. It's a quick way of saying what
we get when we perform the sum of all of these
guys and multiply them all together. And over
here, well, we're just getting the sum of all the
cubes of the natural numbers. And again, this is
a highly questionable thing for exactly the same
reason as the previous one was. This seems to us
to be unbounded and not even vaguely approaching
anything, and these things here are all giving
us something completely different from what
appears to be happening on the right-hand side.
Nevertheless, it's still kind of interesting.
So here's another variant now, which is not,
we're sort of stepping away from box arithmetic
generally and just focusing on something that
we can do with these boxes of natural numbers.
So in our world, where we accept rational numbers
also, we can take reciprocals of natural numbers,
and those are fractions or rational numbers. So
that's perhaps something else that we could do,
is to take reciprocals of everything in the
fundamental identity of arithmetic, and the reason
why that works is because taking reciprocals still
obeys this fundamental multiplicative property
that the reciprocal of n * m is n inverse * m
inverse. So here are the powers of two and we're
taking reciprocals of all of them. Here are powers
of three, we're taking reciprocals of all of them,
and carrot everything together, and on the
right-hand side just the reciprocals of the
natural numbers. So now let's apply the S
operator. Okay, maybe we could rewrite this
first of all as one, here's 1/2, here's 1 over 2²,
here's 1 over 2³. It's another way of writing it.
Here's again sort of a geometric series, but now
the ratio is 1/3. The next one the ratio will be
1/5, and so on. And on the right-hand side, well,
we just get the M set of the reciprocal natural
numbers. Okay, what happens when we apply S
now? Well, now this is a geometric series of
sort of a different kind. It's something that's
more familiar to us. We're more comfortable with
assigning a meaning to this unbounded ongoing sum.
Now this is the kind of infinite sum where there
actually is a way of assigning a meaning to it,
okay, and the reason is because the end result
is a number that we already have obtained. It's
already a known rational number. So if you add up
this thing here, 1 plus a half plus a quarter plus
an eighth, etc., the total is two, which according
to the formula is 1 over 1 minus a half. So that's
a half in the bottom there, we get two. Okay,
now that's different from the usual thing that
I complain about because now we have an infinite
series which is summing up to a rational number.
And the point is that we can make sense of that
statement without requiring us to do an infinite
amount of work. We don't have to do an infinite
amount of work to get the thing on the right-hand
side because it's already a known rational number,
okay, and then we can state the meaning of such a
statement in terms of approximations. We can say,
well, if we take the first k terms of the
left-hand side, then we're within such and
such of the end result, two. So that's in dire
contrast with the usual story where we have some
sequence of rational numbers or some series which
supposedly converges to an irrational number. The
problem there is that the irrational number has
not been brought into being except by the actual
process of creating this infinite series. You have
to run the infinite series to the end before the
irrational number, which is the limit, is even
obtained before it comes into existence. Right,
there's a huge difference between these two
scenarios, one of the reasons why we really
want to stick to rational number arithmetic
if we want to do mathematics properly. This
is such a profound understanding. Okay, and I
know it's going to be hard for many of you to
accept because you've been taught from an early
age something different, but this is the way the
world really is. Okay, so we actually can have
legitimate meanings to these various sums in each
one of these things. So here we're going to get 1
over 1 - 1/2, 1 over 1 - 1/3, then 1 over 1 - 1/5,
etc., on the right-hand side, and on the
right-hand side, well, we get this series,
okay, which is more problematic because here
there's not an object that's known to us which
is at the end of the rainbow. And of course, all
students of mathematics will know that this is a
series which diverges in the usual sense. So let's
have another look at this sort of strange identity
that seems to be appearing here. So we have 1 over
1 - 1/2 * 1 over 1 - 1/3 * 1 over 1 - 1/5, etc.,
and over here the harmonic series. Well, this is
two, and this is 1 over 2/3, that's three halves,
and this is 1 over 4/5, which is the same
as 5/4. And then the next one will be 7/6,
the next prime is 11, so it'll be 11/10, and the
next one is 13, so it'll be 13/12. Now all of
these quotients that we're getting are pretty
close to one because they're a prime divided
by one less than the prime, and as the prime
gets big, that quotient will start to approach
one from on top. So what we're doing is we're
multiplying a series of things here together,
and we're always multiplying by something
that's a little bit bigger than one. Okay,
but as we proceed, the separation from one is
decreasing, so we're getting closer and closer to
multiplying by one, although we never do. So it's
a natural question maybe to ask, well, you know,
if you just started computing these things, these
partial things, and just recorded it and looked at
the totals, what's happening to those totals? And
at this stage here, we see that this is probably
telling us something. This is suggesting to us,
because let's say we know that this diverges, it's
suggesting to us that this is going to diverge
as well, right? It would be rather strange if
this thing here converged to something like 13.5
and this diverged. So that's telling us something
about the prime numbers already. Actually, it's
telling us something about how sparse they are
or how not sparse they are. The fact that this
product presumably diverges is giving us some
kind of information about the large scale growth
of prime numbers, so in a large scale kind of
way. So let's do one more variant which moves us
quite close to the Euler product story, but also
brings suddenly into being this idea that
actually we're doing something non-trivial here,
that we're actually touching base with some subtle
and actually rather delicate mathematics just
from this sort of elementary arithmetic with
these boxes and carrots and forming sums. So
the variant is that we're going to replace all
numbers in the fundamental identity with their
squared reciprocals, not their squares, not their
reciprocals, but the squares of their reciprocals,
or the reciprocals of their squares, same thing.
So looking at the first box with powers of two,
we're taking all those powers of two
and raising them to the minus 2 power,
and same thing with the box of powers of
three, etc. And on the right-hand side, well,
we're getting the box consisting of all the square
reciprocals of the natural numbers. Now this first
box here, we can write it as one, this one here
is 1 over 2², this one is 1 over 2²², this one
is 1 over 2²³. We do the same thing as before,
always interchange the order of the powers. Okay,
that makes this also into a geometric series. Same
thing with this one, and also with the next one,
etc. Here the ratio is 1 over 2². Here the ratio
is 1 over 3². The next one, the ratio 1 over 5²,
etc. And on the right-hand side, the M set
of reciprocals of squares of natural numbers.
Now let's see what happens when we apply S, and
suddenly something really interesting comes into
focus. So here I've copied what we've just
obtained: powers of two reciprocal squares,
powers of three reciprocal squares, powers
of five reciprocal squares, etc., carrotting
them all together. And here is the M set of the
reciprocal squares of the natural numbers. Okay,
each of these inside is a geometric series. When
we apply our summation operator, so we take the
sum of all these guys: first term one, ratio 1
over 2². So we get 1/1 - 1 over 2². The next one,
first term one, ratio 1 over 3². So we get 1 over
1 - 1 over 3² * 1 over 1 - 1/5², etc. And on the
right-hand side, the sum of the reciprocals
of the squares of the natural numbers. So
what does this look like in practice? Well, this
is 3/4. Over here, when we take the reciprocal,
we get 4/3. Here we have 1 - 1/9, so that's 8/9.
Reciprocal 9/8. Over here, 5² is 25 - 1 is 24,
so we get 25/24. Next one is 7, we get
49/48, and so on. So now we have the square
of the primes in the numerators and one less
than each of those in the denominator. Now the
right-hand side, however, is very different from
the previous one because there's a square there,
and Euler famously realized that this thing sums
not to infinity, doesn't go on and on. It actually
sums to something that he was able to identify in
terms of pi, famously pi²/6. So that's certainly
one of Euler's great remarkable formulas which
made a big impression on everyone. It is still
a remarkable kind of thing, even though strictly
speaking, you know, what is pi? Well, we don't
really know. And actually, this sum strictly
speaking also, it doesn't really work, but there's
something going on here. Okay, definitely there's
something going on here, something like magic. But
now what we have is from this box arithmetic point
of view, some kind of identity like this, that for
assuming Euler's result, and we suppose we have
some approximate meaning to this, it means that
the product of these squared primes divided by
the one less than them, that that is very likely
heading towards something actually reasonably
concrete. It's like a region on the number line,
maybe not exactly a point, but some kind of object
on the number line. So this is now interesting and
it's decidedly different from the previous one
that we had where we were just looking at product
of primes over primes minus one. Great, so
now we actually can make a calculation. Okay,
let's choose the first primes up to 100. So 2²,
3², 5², 7², and all the numbers less than those,
11², 13², 17², all the way up to 79², 83², 89²,
97². The last prime is 100. Okay, so that's
an initial sequence of the left-hand side of
what we were obtaining. And this thing here,
okay, it's a rational number and we can
approximate what it is numerically. My
computer tells me it's approximately 1.64945.
And what is pi²/6 approximately? Okay,
in quotes because pi really is not a properly
defined number, but approximately it's 1.644934.
So the claim of that formula that we had is that
if we keep on doing this by multiplying by further
and further primes, we should be heading towards
this number. So this number here is getting bigger
a little bit at a time, and I want you to think
about this in terms of like perhaps an interest
payment. Okay, let's say we're at this stage here,
we've computed this thing here. What does it mean
to multiply by 121/120? Well, this is, you know,
a little bit more than 1% more than one. So it's
something like 1.01. So this is like how much you
owe if you borrowed this amount of money for one
year at a roughly 1% interest rate. Okay, just
a little ratio here is giving us 1% interest.
So the amount that you owe after a year is a
little bit more, roughly about 1% more. Okay,
now the next year, well, we're talking about
13²/13² - 1, that's a little bit closer to one,
so the interest rate has gone down a little bit,
maybe it's 8% or something like that, or 0.9%.
Okay, so your principal that you're going to owe
after that year is still going to be bigger, but
it's going to be bigger by geometrically less than
it was the previous year. And that's carrying on,
so the interest rate every year is decreasing.
It would be nice if banks did this, but anyway,
the interest rates are decreasing and heading
towards zero. But what we're saying is that the
total amount that you're going to owe as you keep
on going is going to head towards this thing here.
Now on the other hand, on the right-hand side of
the equation, we had the sum of the reciprocal
squares, and we can calculate those as well.
That's just a very explicit calculation. So I
summed k = 1 to 300. My computer told me that
it's about 1.641606, which is pretty close to
this thing here, right? So you see there's
two different ways of calculating something,
right? This calculation here is in some sense
calculating the sum of the squared reciprocals
of the natural numbers from k = 1 to 300, or
reciprocally, this thing here is calculating
this product over primes of these things here.
Now, which of those is more work? I don't know.
But you see that there are two quite different
things here that are being compared, and we're
actually touching base with some real mathematics
here, having to do with partial sums of this thing
and having to do with partial products of this
thing, and some kind of closeness between these
two things. Now at this stage here, we can also
perhaps appreciate that this kind of information
is telling us something about the growth of
primes. So just let's suppose that we sort of stop
at this level here and pause for a second and ask,
okay, what's going to happen from here on? Okay,
so if the primes from here on get really far
apart and they get big fast, okay, if the primes
are big, then we're going to be multiplying
by numbers which are really close to one,
so the interest rate will be very close to zero.
Then it's possible for us to make a computation
that shows that we're not going to be able to get
from here to here by continued multiplications by
these further ratios if the primes are going too
fast. Okay, so the fact that as we keep on going,
we're going from here to here, is telling us
something about the growth rate of primes. If
the primes are growing too fast, we're not going
to be able to get to here. On the other hand,
if the primes are not growing fast enough, you
know, if there's a lot of primes, say, between
100 and 200, then we'll be multiplying too often
by interest rates which are still reasonably big,
and that's going to bump us over going from here
to here. For example, if you have an interest rate
of 1% and you have that for 20 years, and compound
interest, you know, you're going to probably pay
something like 22 or 23 cents on your original, so
multiplying one by 1.23 will definitely bump this
over that. Right, so that's the kind of reasoning
that allows you to see that this scenario is going
to allow you to extract some information about
prime numbers. Now this is all very primitive,
of course, but you think about the Riemann zeta
function and the associated number theory as
encoded by the Riemann hypothesis as being some
much more sophisticated analysis somehow in the
same direction. Okay, that the form of the zeta
function and these sums tell you something about
primes. And what I'm trying to convince you today
is that you can see some of this at least in an
elementary fashion without any complex numbers,
without any supposition that there is such a
thing as the Riemann zeta function. You can
see this simply as a consequence of formulas
that are obtainable from the fundamental identity
of arithmetic by suitably applying multiplicative
functions to this identity in box arithmetic. I'm
Norman Wildberger, thanks for listening. [Music]